the other matter on my agenda today is
that I was implored to read a particular
book people just said well you've got to
read this book you've got to read this
objectivist Tome that that will answer
all your questions and the title of it
is quote The Logical leap induction in
physics end quote by an objectivist
called David haraman and with a forward
by Leonard pikoff in one of the great
luminaries of objectivism so I got the
book and I read sections and I'm sorry
to say nothing new did not persuade me I
went straight to the parts I was really
interested in you know how how did
universal gravitation come about and uh
how do we how do we marry up the
existence of Newton's Theory with
Einstein's theory what does he say about
that because whatever is said about that
tells me the whole story about what this
fellow thinks about how knowledge is
constructed so we're going to go through
that section now before that well let's
go to what he said about popper okay
word search on popper because he comes
up well it's complete Hatchet job of
course as you would expect he doesn't
get quoted uh his name appears twice in
the text here it is I'll read the the
passage in full this is the complete
treatment by Mr David Harryman and his
book all about the use of induction and
physics this is what he says about
popper the sum total quote during the
past Century however many philosophers
have rejected the validity of induction
and argued that every generalization is
an error for example Karl Popper claimed
that all the laws of Kepler Galileo and
Newton have been falsified by demanding
that a true generalization must apply
with unlimited Precision to an unlimited
domain Papa upheld a mystical view of
truth that is forever outside the reach
of man and accessible only to an
omniscient God in the end he was left
with two types of generalizations those
that have been proven false and those
that will be proven false he was then
accused by later philosophers of being
too optimistic they insisted that
nothing can be proven not even a
generalization's falsehood end quote
that's it that's it that the entire book
which is 300 and something Pages that's
what you get about popper not one quote
from his work nothing just assertions
about what he thought that's the
standard of scholarship we've got here
Papa did not claim all the laws of
Newton have been falsified as claimed
there and he did not say everything will
be proven false that's not the
epistemology the fact that knowledge
contains error yes sure does not mean we
will find it and therefore prove it
false and anyway this word proven proven
proven's the wrong word and then the
author wants to link Papa to relativists
or Skeptics it's just completely
ignorant it's not fair in the same way
that the fact that I keep saying the
favor is not return the objectivists are
not connecting with quotes pull out some
quotes pull out some quotes and take
exception to them fine let's explain
Papa in his own words the summary
probably of a summary in fact well he
does as linked to a reference to
objective knowledge but it's just a book
there's no page number but let's go on
to the meat of the matter so to speak
the book this book then goes on to
explain how Newton discovered universal
gravitation the book provides a history
of what Newton used universal
gravitation to do in predicting tides
and shapes of orbits and he just asserts
that the move from Kepler's laws to an
inverse Square law is induction and
further in a chapter called Discovery is
proof the claim is that the mathematical
proof of the inverse Square law of
gravitation amounts to its Discovery at
no point do we concern ourselves with
the fact that it is strictly false
refuted by experiment the author writes
on this quote a rigorous process of
inductive logic enabled Newton to climb
from narrower generalizations to his
fundamental laws end quote we're never
told what this inductive logic is
exactly the description offered is
perfectly consistent with Newton
conjecturing the explanation it goes on
to say quote the author says quote for
example he did not leap to the law of
universal gravitation and then search
for confirming instances rather as we
saw he began by identifying the nature
of the soul of force on the planets in
the principia he then showed that a
similar force is exerted by Jupiter and
Saturn on their respective moons and he
therefore had a law pertaining to both
planets and moons he next showed that a
similar force is exerted by Earth on
both terrestrial bodies and our moon and
he therefore had a law that applied to
all bodies on Earth's surface as well as
planets and moons he then showed that
the attractive forces not merely exerted
by Earth as a whole but it is exerted
independently by every bit of matter
making up the Earth his analysis of
Earth's shape and procession and the
ocean tides provided important evidence
for this conclusion end quote okay so he
showed proved or induced our complete
falsehood because there is no such a
force and he came up with the law no no
by looking at the instances where it
worked in these different places and
then generalizing to the law no he had
the general law and then realized that
necessarily it applied everywhere
throughout the entire universe so of
course to each of those places each of
those instances where it applied anyway
the author goes on to that quote if at
the end Newton had been asked now that
you have this Theory how are you going
to prove it he could answer simply by
pointing to the Discovery process itself
the step-by-step logical sequence by
which he arrived at his theory is the
proof each step was the grasp of a
causal Connection by the mathematical
processing of observational data since
there were no arbitrary leaps there is
no problem of justifying them end quote
so according to the author therefore
Newton's theory of gravity is proved and
Justified and yet it's false which is
interesting I wonder how the author goes
about squaring this circle they've got
to mention Einstein eventually right and
they do so let's read what he said here
we go strap yourself in quote
the major axis of Mercury's orbit is
observed to rotate very slowly as seen
from Earth the total rotation appears to
be about 1.56 degrees per Century
calculations show that almost 90 percent
of this apparent rotation is caused by
the procession of the Earth's spin axis
which is entirely explained by Newton's
theory of the remaining effect more than
90 is caused by the gravitational pull
of the other planets which is also
explained by Newton's theory that leaves
less than one percent of the total
observed effect which amounts to 43 Arc
seconds per Century unexplained by
Newton's Theory
foreign
this residual effect is explained by
Einstein's theory the predictions of
which differ slightly from Newtons in
the strong gravitational field near the
sun end quote
so he's completely confused prediction
with explanation he's saying that well
most of Mercury's orbit is explained by
Newton's Theory the residual left over
is explained by Einstein's theory but
the explanation in Newton's theory is a
force the existence of a force so he's
saying well almost all of it is
explained by this force of gravity it's
just the residual that we use the
curvature of space-time for which isn't
a force
what is he talking about how can you
both explain you explain the same thing
by recourse to force and not a force
simultaneously it's a strict
contradiction
it doesn't work at all prediction okay
even then where it's a bit dodgy we can
predict the entirety of Newton of of
Mercury's orbit the entirety of it by
recourse to general relativity we never
have to bring in Newton's Law at all we
don't in fact no no astrophysicist worth
their sold is going to try and predict
where Mercury is going to be in fact and
any other planet it's precisely speaking
you're not going to use Newton's Theory
not in this day and age if you want
highly precise predictions of where
those things are going to be you're
going to use general relativity I'm
going to use a computer but you know
program with general relativity to get
the position exactly right so no no
Mercury is orbit is entirely explained
by Einstein's theory entirely otherwise
it would be like saying well you know
much of the life on Earth can be
explained by creationism or spontaneous
generation some of the Rest by
lamarckism and then a little bit left
over is evolution by natural selection
foreign
I mean how do we explain how GPS works
most of it being explained by Newton's
Theory and the rest are being explained
by general relativity I mean Google Maps
will tell you you're right outside the
post office when in fact you're standing
in the middle of a field if we use
Newtonian gravity for it but hey well
how about gravitational waves
it is not that Newton's gravity is true
in some domain or not it's true or not
surely the objectivist can agree with
that I know they talk about contextual
knowledge but contextual truth that's
relativist if anything is
the fact is Newton's theory is not true
it works in some places because it's an
approximation containing some truth but
strictly false it's an approximation to
reality not reality approximations to
reality are not reality they are not the
truth and even where it works Newton's
Theory it never works exactly Newton's
Theory the predictions looked at it high
enough resolution do not correspond
exactly to where any of the planets are
Mercury is just a spectacular case in
point so there we have it most of
Mercury's orbit is explained by Newton
and just the remainder just the
correction is explained by Einstein so
what this means taken literally is most
of Mercury's orbit is explained by an
inverse Square law for Force it's
explained by a force and the reminder is
explained not by an inverse Square law
but by a metric and tenses and the
curvature of space-time so how does
reality know what to invoke and when how
does it know that well for now gravity
is a force and now for the remainder
it's the curvature of space that's all
wrong
it's all the curvature of space-time
that's what gravity is that's how we
explain not merely predict explain
what's going on not merely with the
procession of Mercury's orbit which is
the example being used here but all
orbits all falling objects all Tides
every single gravitational effect is a
manifestation of the curvature of
space-time it has nothing to do with the
force it has nothing to do with an
inverse Square law that has been refuted
the inverse Square law is a nice
heuristic it's an approximation to
reality in some way shape or form but
known to be false and yes in Papa's
conception sure Einstein's general
relativity is an approximation to
reality as well we don't know how it's
false we expect it to turn out false we
can't say it will turn out false as
incorrectly implied in this text because
we don't know for sure or anything
including that we're going to find the
successor we hope to we're trying hard
to we expect there must be because you
know know the theory of gravity general
relativity just doesn't comport properly
with quantum theory all that's missed
all this context all the richness of the
history of Science and the philosophy of
science science itself and actual
physics it's all missed here this is a
fictitious story about how science works
it's got nothing that makes no contact
with what's really going on science is
not merely about predictions the orbit
of mercury is not explained by explained
I'll just predicted explained by Newton
it's explained best explained only so
far as we know by Einstein general
relativity by the curvature is based on
and whatever the successor is whatever
the successor is we don't expect it to
go back to being forces anyway the
author goes on Einstein did not refute
the laws of Newton just as Newton did
not refute the laws of Kepler in both
cases the truth of the earlier theory
was presupposed and then a more general
theory was developed that applied within
an expanded context of knowledge and in
both cases the expanded context of not
included small discrepancies between new
data and the old Theory which were then
explained by the new Theory this is
often how science progresses end quote
that is completely false Einstein did
not assume Newton true and taken further
as was just claimed there that the the
truth of the earlier theory was not
presupposed the truth of the earlier
theory was I say again that there was a
force there was this Force this pull
this attraction and in fact it moved
instantaneously through space which is a
problem that was only solved shown to be
unnecessary false by the existence of a
new explanation doing away with the need
for forces and instantaneous action or
distance Einstein did not assume Newton
true he from the ground up changed the
foundations of what gravity time and
space were the poverty of the analysis
in this book is absolutely striking it's
a very desperate attempt by someone who
knows something about the history of
physics to salvage induction they are
dogmatically wedded to objectivist
epistemology they need for whatever
reason to salvage it from well I guess
to some extent the influence of Papa or
wider understandings of the history of
science they need to try and Salvage it
but they can only do so by literally
butchering the history and the science
it's true desperation but the author
goes on quote there is only one aspect
of Newton's theory that was rejected
rather than absorbed into Einstein's
theory and in this case one can only
wish that Einstein had been consistent
in his rejection Newton treated the
concepts space and time as existence
independent of bodies rather than as
relationships among bodies thus he
viewed space as an infinite Cosmic
backdrop that exists independent of the
bodies placed in it and he claimed that
this backdrop has real physical effects
on the bodies that accelerate with
respect to it Newton offered scientific
arguments to support his view of space
and time but these arguments are
non-sequiturs absolute good space and
time played no role in the reasoning
that proved his theory thus I had no
need to mention these ideas while
presenting his Discovery process in fact
absolute space and time were intimately
connected to Newton's religious views
and therefore they are an arbitrary
element in his theory end quote
[Laughter]
he were just saying well Newton was
religious and so this is why he had this
vision of space and time but again that
is not it begins there by saying there
is only one aspect of Newton's theory
that was rejected rather than absorbed
in Einstein's theory and he's talking
about space and time no he's not that no
no no
Force without the gravitational force
the force of gravitation that that does
not feature an Einstein's theory it is
clear there is no Force there is no
action at a distance there are many
aspects of Newton's theory that don't
appear in Einsteins it is
laughable there's no mention of
eddington's experiment okay the idea
that Starlight bends more during a solar
eclipse than it does under Newton's
Theory falsifying refuting Newton's
Theory that's an egregious emission and
one might presume deliberate we can only
understand why Newton's theory is
strictly Wrong by recourse to
experiments like that or any of the
other countless observations as of this
date such as Mercury's orbit where it
makes the wrong prediction it is wrong
period full stop it's not just about the
wrong prediction it invokes invokes mind
you things in reality that don't exist
period full stop it's wrong there's no
mention of how the force of gravity
under Newton's Theory moved
instantaneously between bodies and that
was replaced by an influence from
Gravity this curvature space time that
was limited by the speed of light
there's no concern here about the
relativity of space and time rather than
being a fixed space and time of Newton
this is look crucial difference he tries
to get there but he says it's to do with
religion or something okay so enough of
that there's just not enough time to do
that kind of thing as you can see read
all the books with all the egregious
errors in history and science and
misinterpretations of Papa and can't
read more on induction this is it says
there's just such a Poverty of
epistemology there it's root and Branch
false so this is me doing my best